Edited by Clifford J. Tabin, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, and approved August 30, 2019 (received for review April 18, 2019)

Author contributions: D.R.L. and J.C. designed research; D.R.L. and K.N.G.-M. performed research; P.F., E.D.C., Z.B., H.A., and S.K. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; D.R.L., K.N.G.-M., and E.J.O. analyzed data; and D.R.L. and J.C. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Gas exchange in the lung relies on passive diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide across an extraordinarily thin epithelium that is nearly entirely made of the poorly understood alveolar type 1 (AT1) cell. Our study shows that all AT1 cells express and require NK homeobox 2-1 (Nkx2-1) for their development and maintenance. Nkx2-1 mutant AT1 cells lose their characteristic molecular and cellular features and transform toward a gastrointestinal fate, highlighting remarkable plasticity of an otherwise terminally differentiated cell type. This work establishes NKX2-1 as the first overarching factor in the AT1 cell transcriptional hierarchy and paves the way for unraveling not only the unique biology of AT1 cells but also cell type-specific roles of a lineage transcription factor.

The extraordinarily thin alveolar type 1 (AT1) cell constitutes nearly the entire gas exchange surface and allows passive diffusion of oxygen into the blood stream. Despite such an essential role, the transcriptional network controlling AT1 cells remains unclear. Using cell-specific knockout mouse models, genomic profiling, and 3D imaging, we found that NK homeobox 2-1 (Nkx2-1) is expressed in AT1 cells and is required for the development and maintenance of AT1 cells. Without Nkx2-1, developing AT1 cells lose 3 defining features—molecular markers, expansive morphology, and cellular quiescence—leading to alveolar simplification and lethality. NKX2-1 is also cell-autonomously required for the same 3 defining features in mature AT1 cells. Intriguingly, Nkx2-1 mutant AT1 cells activate gastrointestinal (GI) genes and form dense microvilli-like structures apically. Single-cell RNA-seq supports a linear transformation of Nkx2-1 mutant AT1 cells toward a GI fate. Whole lung ChIP-seq shows NKX2-1 binding to 68% of genes that are down-regulated upon Nkx2-1 deletion, including 93% of known AT1 genes, but near-background binding to up-regulated genes. Our results place NKX2-1 at the top of the AT1 cell transcriptional hierarchy and demonstrate remarkable plasticity of an otherwise terminally differentiated cell type.