Protein-Protein Interaction of Retinoic Acid Receptor a and Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 in Respiratory Epithelial Cells*
Received for publication, December 18, 2000, and in revised form, March 21, 2001 Published, JBC Papers in Press, March 23, 2001, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M011378200
Cong Yan‡, Angela Naltner, Julie Conkright, and Manely Ghaffari
From the Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039
Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is a 79-amino acid peptide critical to postnatal respiratory adaptation and is devel- opmentally regulated. Previous studies demonstrated that retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and thyroid tran- scription factor 1 (TTF-1) stimulated SP-B gene expres- sion in respiratory epithelial cells. Clustered retinoic acid-responsive element and TTF-1 binding sites were identified in the enhancer region of the SP-B gene and were required for retinoic acid stimulation of the hu- man SP-B (hSP-B) promoter. In addition, RAR and TTF-1 were colocalized in mouse bronchiolar and alve- olar type II epithelial cells, the cellular site of SP-B synthesis. In the present studies, RAR and TTF-1 were colocalized in the nucleus of H441 cells. RAR and TTF-1 synergistically stimulated the hSP-B promoter in H441 cells. Direct protein-protein interactions between RAR and TTF-1 were demonstrated by the glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay and the mammalian cell two hybrid assay. Truncation/deletion studies showed that the RAR-TTF-1 interaction was mediated through the RAR DNA binding domain (DBD) and the TTF-1 ho- meodomain. RAR DBD greatly enhanced TTF-1 home- odomain DNA binding activity to a hSP-B enhancer oli- gonucleotide, in which retinoic acid-responsive element and TTF-1 DNA binding sites overlap. Chromatin immu- noprecipitation assay demonstrated that retinoic acid treatment of H441 cells greatly stimulated both RAR and TTF-1 DNA binding to the hSP-B enhancer region in H441 cells. These findings support a model in which RAR/retinoid X receptor, TTF-1, and coactivators (p160 members and CBP) form an enhanceosome in the en- hancer region of the hSP-B gene.
Signaling via the retinoic acid (RA)1/retinoic acid receptor (RAR) axis is known to be important to epithelial cell differen- tiation and proliferation in the lung (1). RAR signaling is re- quired in lung morphogenesis as observed in double knockout RARa2/2 and RARb2/2 mice that developed lung hypoplasia and aplasia (2). RA influenced branching morphogenesis and
* This work was supported by the NHLBI, National Institutes of Health Grant HL-61803 and Specialized Center for Research Grant HL56387 (to C. Y.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, TCHRF, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039. Tel.: 513-636-7990; Fax: 513-636- 7868; E-mail: Cong.Yan@chmcc.org.
1 The abbreviations used are: RA, retinoic acid; CBP, cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein; GST, glutathione S-transfer- ase; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RAR, retinoic acid receptor; RARE, retinoic acid-responsive element; RXR, retinoid X receptor; SP-B, surfactant protein B; TTF-1, thyroid transcription factor 1; hSP-B, human SP-B; HD, homeodomain; AD, activation domain.
alveolarization of the fetal lung in vitro (3–5). RA enhanced SP-B mRNA and surfactant protein B (SP-B) expression in lung epithelial cells and explant cultures of fetal lungs (3, 5– 8). SP-B is produced in alveolar type II epithelial cells and in subsets of non-ciliated bronchiolar cells lining conducting air- ways, and in H441 cells (human pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells). SP-B enhances the spreading and stability of phospho- lipids in surfactant in the alveoli and plays a critical role in lamellar body and tubular myelin organization (9). SP-B is essential for postnatal respiratory adaptation after birth. Mu- tations of the SP-B gene in the human and mouse cause lung dysfunction at birth and susceptibility to oxygen toxicity (10 –13).
An enhancer located at –500/–375 base pairs was identified in the hSP-B 59-flanking regulatory region that contains clustered retinoic acid-responsive elements (RAREs) and TTF-1 binding sites (14, 15). Deletion of the enhancer sequence significantly reduced transcriptional activity of the hSP-B promoter (14). These sites were required for RA stimulation of hSP-B gene expression in respiratory epithelial cells. Both RAR and TTF-1 bound to the clustered RARE and TTF-1 binding sites in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene (14, 15). A dominant negative RAR mutant inhibited hSP-B transcription (16).
RAR belongs to the steroid/nonsteroid nuclear hormone re- ceptor superfamily and consists of three receptor isotypes a, b, and g, which are encoded by distinct genes. RAR forms a heterodimer with retinoid X receptor (RXR) that binds to RARE on the target genes. Whereas RAR has weak DNA binding affinity, RXR greatly enhances RAR DNA binding affinity through dimerization of RAR/RXR (17). RAR consists of a DNA binding domain containing Zn21 finger motifs, a ligand-bind- ing/dimerization domain, a ligand-independent AF-1 transcrip- tion activation domain, and a ligand-dependent AF-2 transcrip- tion activation domain. Through these various functional domains, RAR interacts with other transcription factors and coactivators to stimulate gene transcription.
TTF-1 is a tissue-specific transcription factor of Nkx2 family members expressed in the lung, the thyroid, and part of the forebrain (18). In the lung, TTF-1 mRNA and protein were detected at the earliest stages of differentiation and were re- stricted to bronchial and alveolar epithelium in the postnatal lung (18, 19). TTF-1 binds to and activates the promoters of a number of genes selectively expressed in the respiratory epi- thelium, including SP-B (20). Lung morphogenesis and surfac- tant protein expression were markedly disrupted in TTF-12/2 mice (21). Studies by deletion/truncation mutagenesis, mam- malian cell cotransfection, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and immunofluorescent assays revealed three distinct func- tional domains of TTF-1 (22). The N- and C-terminal regions of TTF-1 are transactivation domains. The homeodomain (HD) of TTF-1 is responsible for DNA binding and nuclear localization.
  This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.
RA treatment triggers formation of an enhanceosome in the 21686 This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org
RAR and TTF-1 Interaction in Respiratory Epithelial Cells 21687
hSP-B enhancer region that contains RAR/RXR, TTF-1, CBP, and p160 coactivators (19). The DNA binding of RAR and TTF-1 to the hSP-B enhancer plays a critical role for enhan- ceosome formation. Because both clustered RAR and TTF-1 DNA binding sites overlap in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene, it is highly possible that RAR and TTF-1 interact with each other to facilitate enhanceosome formation. In this report, direct interactions between TTF-1 and RARa were identified that enhanced DNA binding to the hSP-B enhancer in respira- tory epithelial cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture—Human pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells (H441) were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were maintained at 37 °C in 5% CO2/air and passaged weekly.
Co-localization of RAR and TTF-1 in H441 Cells by Immunofluores- cent Double Staining Assay—The hRARa (from Dr. Pierre Chambon) and TTF-1-FLAG (22) expression vectors were cotransfected into H441 cells. Immunofluorescent staining was performed 2 days after cotrans- fection following a procedure described previously (22). TTF-1-FLAG was recognized by FLAG monoclonal antibody (Eastman Kodak Co.) conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate, whereas hRARa was recog- nized by hRARa polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) conjugated with Texas red. The fluorescent signals were analyzed by the Leica DM IRBE confocal microscope.
Transfection and Reporter Gene Assays—The hSP-B-500 construct was made previously (14). The RARa expression vector was from the original authors (Dr. Pierre Chambon). For the RAR/TTF-1 cotransfec- tion study, transient transfection and luciferase reporter assays were performed as described previously (14, 15). Briefly, H441 cells were seeded at densities of 2 3 105 cells/well in six-well plates. The hSP-B500 reporter construct (0.25 mg) was cotransfected with 0.5 mg of RAR, 0.5 mg of PCR3.0/TTF-1, and 0.5 mg of pCMV-b-galactosidase plasmid into H441 cells by Fugene6 (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). After 2 days of incubation, cells were lysed, and luciferase activities were performed using the luciferase assay system (Promega). The light units were assayed by luminometry (Monolight 3010, Analytical Luminescence Laboratory, San Diego, CA). In each transfection, b-galactosidase ac- tivities were determined for normalization of transfection efficiency.
Glutathione S-Transferase (GST) Pull-down Assay—The full-length and various truncated TTF-1 constructs were from a previous study (22). The C-terminal domain was subcloned into the PCR3.0 vector (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA) at the HindIII and NotI sites. Because the TTF-1 C-terminal domain only contains one methionine and generated a weak pull-down signal, three extra methionine codons were placed before the NotI site by PCR to enhance radioactive visualization (22).
To make GST fusion proteins, the full length, DBD, and AF-2 domain of RARa were subcloned into the pGEX4T-1 GST vector (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) at the EcoRI and NotI restriction enzyme sites by PCR. The plasmids were transformed into JM109 or BL21 bacterial strains for protein expression. After 3 h induction at 37 °C by 1 mM isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside, the bacteria were harvested and resuspended in 13 PBS, followed by sonication and treatment with 1% Triton X-100. The proteins were purified by incubation with a 50% slurry of glutathione-Sepharose 4B beads (Amersham Pharmacia Bio- tech) for 30 min at room temperature and then eluted from beads using glutathione elution buffer followed by dialysis. Protein expression was confirmed by Coomassie Blue staining and Western blots using either RARa antibody or GST antibody (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) after gel electrophoresis. Protein concentrations were determined.
For GST pull-down, full-length TTF-1 and various domain proteins were synthesized and [35S]methionine (Met) labeled using Promega’s in vitro transcription/translation kit. Approximately 1 mg each of purified GST, RARa-GST, RARaDBD-GST, and RARaAF-2-GST were incu- bated with 20 ml of 50% glutathione-Sepharose 4B beads at room temperature for 30 min. Approximately 25 ml of the [3 5 S]Met-labeled full-length TTF-1 and various domains were added to the fusion pro- tein-bead mixture and incubated at room temperature for 1.5 h. The protein-protein-bead mixtures were washed three times with 30 ml of 13 PBS. The protein-protein-bead complexes were then resuspended in 30 ml of 13 SDS sample buffer and run on 10–20% tricine polyacryl- amide gels (Invitrogen-Novex). The protein gels were fixed and incu- bated in Amplify reagent (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) at room tem- perature. The gels were dried and exposed to x-ray films for visualization.
Mammalian Two Hybrid System Assay—The reporter pG5LUC, pVP16/TTF-1 BD, and pM/RARa BD constructs were made previously (15). The plasmid constructs of pVP16/TTF-1 HD AD and pVP16/RARa DBD AD were made by subcloning the PCR products of TTF-1 HD and RARa DBD into the pV16 AD vector (CLONTECH, Palo Alto, CA) at the EcoRI/XbaI sites. Transfection and luciferase assay were performed as described previously (15).
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay—Wild type double-stranded Ba (–439 to –410) and Bb (–417 to –390) oligos from the hSP-B enhancer region were synthesized, annealed, and purified as described previously (14, 15). The oligonucleotides were radiolabeled by [g-32P]ATP and polynucleotide kinase, and incubated with 10 ng of the purified TTF-1 HD-GST fusion protein and 100 ng of the RARa DBD-GST fusion protein alone or in combination. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay was performed by following the procedures described previously (14, 15). As a negative control, GST protein was also incubated with the radiolabeled probes alone or in combination with TTF-1 HD-GST or RARa DBD-GST.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay of RARa and TTF-1 in H441 Cells—The assay followed a previously published procedure (23). Briefly, H441 cells were seeded at a density of 1 3 106 cells per 100-mm dish. The following day, cells were treated with 10 mM of all trans retinoic acid for 24 h. Untreated cells served as controls. Cells were then treated with 1% formaldehyde in serum-free RPMI for 10 min at room temperature to cross-link proteins and DNA, followed by rinsing with PBS twice. The cell pellets were collected by centrifugation. The cells were lysed by adding 150 ml of lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 8.1, 140 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 3 mM EDTA, and 13 protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) and were allowed to incubate on ice for 10 min. The cells were sonicated followed by centrif- ugation, and the supernatants containing soluble chromatin were col- lected. For immunoprecipitation, either 20 ml of 100 mg/ml RARa (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 5 ml of monoclonal TTF-1 antibody, or 1 ml of monoclonal FLAG antibody (Kodak) were added to the supernatants and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The sonicated salmon sperm DNA (5 mg) was also added to cell lysate-antibody complex. Fifty ml of 50% protein A/G plus agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were added to the samples and incubated at 4 °C for 2 h followed by centrifugation. The pellets were washed three times, once by 100 ml of TSE 150 mM NaCl buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.1, 150 mM NaCl), once by100 ml of TSE 500 mM NaCl buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.1, and 500 mM NaCl) and once by 100 ml of Buffer III (0.25 M LiCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.1). Each wash was performed on ice for 10 min. Next, the samples were washed three times with 100 ml of TE buffer. The immunocomplexes were then eluted off the beads by incubation with 1% SDS and 0.1 M NaHCO3 on ice for 10 min. Samples were heated at 65 °C for 4 h to reverse formal- dehyde cross-linking followed by phenol-chloroform extraction and so- dium acetate/ethanol precipitation. The DNA was then used as tem- plates for quantitative PCR analysis with primers corresponding to the SP-B enhancer region.
RESULTS
Co-localization of RARa and TTF-1 in H441 Cells by Immun- ofluorescent Double Staining Assay—To study whether RARa and TTF-1 interact with each other to regulate hSP-B gene expression, RARa and TTF-1 colocalization was assessed in H441 cells by double immunofluorescent staining. The hRARa and TTF-1-FLAG expression vectors were cotransfected into H441 cells. Expression of TTF-1-FLAG protein (fluorescein iso- thiocyanate) and hRARa protein (Texas red) was monitored by immunofluorescent staining using FLAG and RAR antibodies. Confocal microscope analysis of fluorescent image revealed co- localization of RARa and TTF-1-FLAG proteins in the nucleus of H441 cells (Fig. 1).
Synergistic Stimulation of the hSP-B500 by RARa and TTF- 1—Overlapping of clustered RARa and TTF-1 DNA binding sites located in the 59-flanking region of the hSP-B gene pro- vides the possibility that two proteins may interact with each other to synergistically stimulate hSP-B promoter expression. RARa and TTF-1 expression vectors were cotransfected with the hSP-B500 luciferase reporter gene into H441 cells. The stimulatory effect of double transfection of RARa and

21688 RAR and TTF-1 Interaction in Respiratory Epithelial Cells
  FIG. 1. Colocalization of RARa and TTF-1 in the nucleus of H441 cells. A, a nucleus of a H441 cell; B, fluorescein isothiocyanate immunofluorescent staining of TTF-1-FLAG expression by monoclonal antibody recognizing the FLAG sequence; C, Texas red immunofluores- cent staining of hRARa expression by polyclonal antibody recognizing RAR; D, overlay of fluorescein isothiocyanate and Texas red immun- ofluorescent staining by confocal microscope.
TTF-1 was much higher than the additive effect of RARa and TTF-1 transfection alone (Fig. 2), indicating that RARa and TTF-1 may interact to stimulate the hSP-B promoter in respi- ratory epithelial cells.
Protein-Protein Interaction between RARa and TTF-1 by GST Pull-down Study—To prove a direct interaction between RARa and TTF-1, a GST pull-down assay was performed. RARa was fused with GST to make a fusion protein. The purified RARa-GST fusion protein was incubated with the [35S]methionine labeled TTF-1 protein. After purification of incubated protein complexes through a Sepharose 4B-glutathi- one column, the radiolabeled TTF-1 protein was retained by the RARa-GST fusion protein as detected by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and autoradiography (Fig. 3). The GST control alone showed a very weak nonspecific pull-down signal, whereas the empty vector control (PCR3.0) showed no signal at all, indicating that [35S]Met-TTF-1 pull-down by the RARa- GST fusion protein was specific. This indicates the direct pro- tein-protein interaction between RARa and TTF-1 in vitro. The interaction between RARa and TTF-1 was not further en- hanced by RA treatment (data not shown), suggesting that the ligand-dependent AF-2 domain may not be required for inter- action with TTF-1.
TTF-1 HD Interaction with RARa—To better understand the mechanism by which RARa and TTF-1 interact with each other, specific domains of TTF-1 required for RARa interaction need to be defined. Previously, TTF-1 functional domains were characterized (Fig. 4A) (22). The N- and C-terminal domains of TTF-1 were transactivation domains for hSP-B promoter acti- vation. The HD of TTF-1 was the DNA binding and nuclear localization domain. Different portions of the TTF-1 molecule were constructed and radiolabeled with [35S]methionine. The radiolabeled TTF-1 fragments were incubated with the full- length RARa-GST fusion protein for pull-down. TTF-1 N-ter- minal and C-terminal domains failed to be pulled down by RARa-GST, whereas the TTF-1 HD was successfully pulled down by RARa-GST (Fig. 4B). Other TTF-1 fragments contain- ing the HD were also pulled down by RARa-GST. Therefore, the TTF-1 HD is responsible for protein-protein interaction with RARa. The interaction appears to be enhanced by the N-terminal domain of TTF-1.
RARa DBD Interaction with TTF-1 HD—RARa is composed of several functional domains, including AF-2, DBD, LBD, and AF-1 domains (1). Because RAR and TTF-1 DNA binding sites overlap in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene, it is highly likely that RARa DBD is involved in the protein-protein inter- action with TTF-1. The AF-2 domain is required for ligand-de- pendent pull-down of nuclear receptor coactivators (25, 29 –31). Therefore, both RARa DBD and AF-2 domains were selected for further study with TTF-1. Different portions of the TTF-1 molecule were radiolabeled with [35S]methionine. The radiola-
FIG. 2. Synergistic stimulation of RARa and TTF-1 on the hSP-B 500. The luciferase reporter construct hSP-B 500 (0.25 mg) was cotransfected with 0.5 mg of TTF-1, RARa, and TTF-1/RARa constructs into H441 cells, respectively. Cells were harvested, and luciferase ac- tivity was measured 72 h later. The activity of hSP-B 500 without cotransfection was defined as 1. Values shown are means 6 S.D.; n 5 3.
FIG. 3. Protein-protein interaction between RARa and TTF-1. Pull-down of full-length [35S]Met-TTF-1 by RARa-GST fusion protein. GST was used as a control. PCR3.0, an empty expression vector.
beled TTF-1 fragments were incubated with the purified RARa-DBD-GST or RARa-AF2-GST fusion proteins for pull- down. The full-length TTF-1 and the TTF-1 HD were pulled down by RARa-DBD GST, but not by RARa-AF2-GST (Fig. 5). This is in agreement with the observation that TTF-1 pull- down by RARa was not RA-dependent. Therefore, DNA binding domains for both proteins are involved in protein-protein in- teraction in vitro.
Protein-Protein Interaction between RARa and TTF-1 in the Mammalian Two Hybrid System—To confirm that RARa DBD and TTF-1 HD are required for the interaction with partners in cells, a mammalian two hybrid system was used. The pair of TTF-1 HD AD/RARa BD constructs (Fig. 6A) and the pair of RARa DBD AD/TTF-1 BD constructs (Fig. 6B) were co-trans- fected into H441 cells with the luciferase reporter construct pG5LUC. The luciferase activities were markedly increased in paired cotransfection (Fig. 6). These findings further support the concept that DNA binding domains of both RARa and TTF-1 are required for protein-protein interaction both in vitro and in cells.
RARa DBD Effect on TTF-1 HD DNA Binding Affinity—The protein-protein interaction between DNA binding domains of RARa and TTF-1 prompted us to exam how this interaction alters their DNA binding affinity in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene. Because the HD is the DNA binding domain and is
 
RAR and TTF-1 Interaction in Respiratory Epithelial Cells
21689
 FIG.4. Identification of TTF-1 func- tional domains required for RARa in- teraction. A, schematic domains of TTF-1 and RARa. N-term, TTF-1 N-terminal trans- activation domain; HD, TTF-1 homeodo- main; C-term, TTF-1 C-terminal domain; AF-1, RARa ligand-independent activation domain; DBD, RARa DNA binding domain; LBD, RARa ligand binding domain; AF-2, RARa ligand-dependent activation domain; F, RARa F domain. B, various [35S]Met- TTF-1 fragments containing the HD were pulled down by RARa-GST fusion protein. GST was used as a control.
 FIG. 5. Identification of RARa func- tional domains required for TTF-1 in- teraction. Full-length [35S]Met-TTF-1 and the TTF-1 HD were pulled down by RARa- DBD GST (1 mg). N-term, TTF-1 N-terminal transactivation domain; C-term, TTF-1 C- terminal transactivation domain; HD, TTF-1 homeodomain; DBD, RARa DNA binding domain; AF-2, RARa ligand-depend- ent activation domain.
 FIG. 6. Interaction between RARa and TTF-1 in the mammalian two hy- brid system. A, the luciferase reporter pG5LUC (0.5 mg) was cotransfected with the pairs of TTF-1 HD AD (0.5 mg)/RARa BD (0.5 mg) into H441 cells to monitor protein-protein interactions. Individual transfection controls are TTF-1 HD AD (0.5 mg)/pM BD (0.5 mg) and pVP16 AD (0.5 mg)/RARa BD (0.5 mg). Luciferase ac- tivity was measured 48 h later. Values shown are means 6 S.D.; n 5 3. B, the assay was performed as outlined in A, except that the luciferase reporter pG5LUC (0.5 mg) was cotransfected with the pairs of TTF-1 BD (0.5 mg)/RARa DBD AD (0.5 mg) into H441 cells.
sufficient for TTF-1 binding to the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene (14), the TTF-1 HD-GST fusion protein was used for the DNA binding assay. The purified TTF-1 HD-GST and RARa DBD-GST fusion proteins were incubated with the oligo Ba (– 439 to – 410) from the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene, which contains overlapping RARE and TTF-1 DNA binding sites as reported previously (15), individually or in combina-
tion. The DNA-protein interactions were monitored by electro- phoretic mobility shift assay. The RARa DBD-GST fusion pro- tein alone had no detectable DNA binding activity to oligo Ba. This is in agreement with previous observations that DNA binding activity of RARa required dimerization with RXR. In- terestingly, the RARa DBD-GST fusion protein significantly enhanced the DNA binding affinity of the TTF-1 HD-GST fu-

21690 RAR and TTF-1 Interaction in Respiratory Epithelial Cells
  FIG. 7. Enhancement of TTF-1 HD DBD binding affinity by RARa DBD. The radiolabeled oligonucleotide Ba probe was incubated with the purified TTF-1 HD-GST fusion protein or the RARa-DBD GST fusion protein or in combination. Free probes and DNA-protein com- plexes were separated on 4% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels. Ar- rows indicate the TTF-1-HD-GST DNA complex. The core sequence for TTF-1 binding is underlined, and that for RARE is italicized.
sion protein to oligo Ba (Fig. 7). As a negative control, no enhanced TTF-1 HD-GST DNA binding activity to Ba oligo was observed by the GST protein after incubation with TTF-1 HD- GST (data not shown).
RA Enhances RAR and TTF-1 DNA Binding to the hSP-B 59-Flanking Regulatory Region in H441 Cells—In vivo chroma- tin immunoprecipitation assay was used to test whether RA treatment enhances RAR and TTF-1 binding affinity to the 59-flanking regulatory region of the hSP-B gene in cells. The primers corresponding to hSP-B base pair –500 to 141 frag- ment, which contains both clustered RAR and TTF-1 sites, were used for PCR of immunoprecipitated chromatin. The monolayer of H441 cells was treated with all-trans RA (1025 M). The untreated cells were used as a control. After protein-DNA cross-linking, soluble chromatin of H441 cells was prepared and immunoprecipitated with the RAR antibody. The amount of the hSP-B DNA sequence associated with RAR was exam- ined by analytic PCR using paired primers corresponding to the hSP-B enhancer and the promoter region (base pairs –500 to 141). RA treatment enhanced RAR binding affinity to the hSP-B 59-flanking regulatory region (Fig. 8A). When the TTF-1 antibody was used to immunoprecipitate soluble chromatin, RA treatment also enhanced TTF-1 DNA binding affinity to the hSP-B 59-flanking regulatory region (Fig. 8B). As a negative control, when the FLAG antibody was used to immunoprecipi- tate soluble chromatin, RA treatment did not generate the hSP-B –500/141 band (Fig. 8C). Plasmid hSP-B 500 was also used as a template for PCR using the same set of hSP-B primers (Fig. 8C). Taken together, RA treatment of H441 cells enhanced RAR/TTF-1 complex formation in the hSP-B regula- tory region to stimulate hSP-B gene expression in vivo.
DISCUSSION
Pulmonary surfactant is synthesized and secreted primarily by type II epithelial cells in the alveoli of the lung. Deficiency or disruption of pulmonary surfactant causes respiratory distress syndrome. Surfactant proteins facilitate the spreading and en- hance the stability of phospholipids in the alveoli and play an important role in host defense. Transcriptional regulation of surfactant protein genes by hormones and tissue-specific tran-
FIG. 8. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay of RAR and TTF-1 DNA binding to the hSP-B 500 enhancer in vivo. H441 cells were harvested with or without RA (1025 M) treatment. Soluble chro- matin was immunoprecipitated with RAR antibody (A) or TTF-1 anti- body (B) and FLAG antibody (C). Coprecipitated DNA was analyzed by PCR using a pair of primers corresponding to the hSP-B promoter/ enhancer region (base pairs –500 to 141). In C, column C is a positive control and represents PCR products using the hSP-B 500 plasmid as a template (control). MW, molecular weight.
scription factors is the key step for elucidation of surfactant homeostasis in lung development and postnatal respiratory adaptation.
RA was shown to be important for the stimulation of hSP-B gene expression at the transcriptional level. Although the RA/ RAR signaling pathway is well known to be critical to epithelial cell differentiation and proliferation in many tissues, little is known about how this pathway interacts with and is deter- mined by tissue-specific factors in the respiratory system. We previously demonstrated that in the pulmonary epithelial sys- tem, RA stimulation of the hSP-B promoter through RARE sites is dependent on the juxtaposed clustered TTF-1 sites in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene (15). Both RARa and TTF-1 were expressed in H441 cells and stimulated the hSP-B promoter in dose-dependent fashions (7, 15). After separation from the downstream TTF-1 sites, the clustered RARE sites in the enhancer region still rendered the SV40 promoter response to stimulation by RA (15). Therefore, the enhancer of the hSP-B gene works as an independent unit in which the tissue-specific factor TTF-1 determines RA/RAR signaling activity in pulmo- nary epithelial cells.
To determine whether RAR and TTF-1 directly interact with each other, protein-protein interaction studies were performed in the present study. There are three isotypes of RAR mediat- ing RA function in cells. Only RARa was detected both in mouse type II epithelial cells and in the H441 cell line that shares characteristics of non-ciliated bronchiolar cells (7, 15). Therefore, RARa was chosen for protein-protein interaction with TTF-1 in H441 cells. GST pull-down experiments demon- strated the direct protein-protein interaction between the two proteins (Fig. 3). Deletion/truncation studies further defined that the DBD domain of RARa and the HD of TTF-1 were required for protein-protein interaction (Figs. 4–6). Interest- ingly, the DBD domain of RARa enhanced TTF-1 HD DNA binding affinity on an hSP-B enhancer oligonucleotide sharing the overlapping RARE/TTF-1 binding sites (Fig. 7). This may resulted from conformational changes of the oligonucleotide or TTF-1 in the presence of RARa DBD. This process seems not be affected by RA. The ligand-dependent AF-2 domain, which is required for recruiting nuclear receptor coactivators through protein-protein interaction, was not required for protein-pro- tein interaction with TTF-1. In addition, RARa and TTF-1 were colocalized in the nucleus of H441 cells as demonstrated by confocal/double immunofluorescent study (Fig. 1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation study showed that RA treatment in- creased recruitment of RAR and TTF-1 proteins to the en- hancer region of the endogenous hSP-B gene in H441 cells (Fig. 8). Collectively, our data support the idea that RA/RAR

RAR and TTF-1 Interaction in Respiratory Epithelial Cells 21691
not only depends on TTF-1 to stimulate the hSP-B promoter but also facilitates TTF-1 binding to the hSP-B enhancer re- gion. TTF-1 and RAR together synergistically stimulate hSP-B transcription.
The complexity of RAR stimulation on target genes depends on multiple protein factors interacting with its various func- tional domains. In addition to interacting with TTF-1 in this study, RAR interacts with many other transcription factors, including transcriptional intermediary factor 2 (24, 25), AP-1 (26), TFIIH (27), and TAFII135 (28), among others. Most im- portantly, RAR recruits p160 nuclear receptor coactivators and CBP/p300 in the presence of RA through physical interaction with the AF-2 domain (25, 29–31). We previously demon- strated that CBP and p160 nuclear receptor coactivators (ste- roid receptor coactivator 1, transcriptional intermediary factor 2, and activator of thyroid and retinoic acid receptor) signifi- cantly stimulated the hSP-B promoter in a dose-dependent fashion (15). p160 nuclear receptor coactivators and CBP in- teracted with TTF-1 in the mammalian two hybrid system and synergistically stimulated hSP-B500 with TTF-1 (19). They were all colocalized with SP-B in developing and adult epithe- lial cells in the lung (19). Coiling of DNA around a histone octamer in the nucleosome is a cornerstone of transcriptional control. Nucleosomes repress all genes, including genes essen- tial for respiratory functions. They occlude sites of protein binding to DNA and interfere with the interaction of activators, polymerases, transcription factors, and DNA-modifying en- zymes (32). Therefore, relief of repression by chromatin is the first step toward the initiation of gene transcription. p160 nuclear receptor coactivators and CBP/p300 possess intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity, which reversibly acetylates specific lysine residues within the N-terminal tails of core histones and leads to chromatin remodeling and gene activa- tion (32).
Based on our findings, an enhanceosome model was postu- lated that TTF-1, RAR/RXR, CBP, and p160 coactivators form a transcriptional complex in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene (19), which may play an important role in temporal and spatial expression of SP-B during lung development. The in- teraction between RAR and TTF-1 provides a foundation for the enhanceosome formation in the enhancer region of the hSP-B gene. Because both RAR and TTF-1 are essential for lung organogenesis and branching morphogenesis, our study provided direct evidence and a model system to explain how RAR and TTF-1 interact with and depend on each other to regulate lung-specific gene expression at the transcriptional level to influence lung development.
